feat: Add Vaadin 23 Portlet documentation (#1358)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/portlet/creating-multi-module-portlet-project.asciidoc

---
title: Creating Multi-Module Portlet Project
order: 5
description: Shows how to create a multi-module Vaadin Portlet Maven project with each portlet is in its own module, and frontend assets are in one module
layout: page
page-links:
  - https://github.com/vaadin/portlet[GitHub]
---

= Creating Multi-Module Portlet Project

> It is possible to set up your Vaadin Portlet project up as a multi-module Maven project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to set up your Vaadin Portlet project as a multi-module Maven project.
```

This allows each portlet to be placed into its own module, allowing for greater separation between the portlets.
The separation makes it easier to separate concerns and allow multiple people or teams to work on the portlets simultaneously.

> The multi-module Vaadin Portlet project can naturally contain non-Vaadin Portlets in their own modules (and vice-versa).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The multi-module Vaadin Portlet project can naturally contain non-Vaadin Portlets in their own modules (and vice versa).
```
Is it clear what "vice versa" means here?

A module may of course contain multiple portlets, if it makes sense for the project.

> Multi-Module project is the recommended setup for Vaadin Portlet projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-module project is the recommended setup for Vaadin Portlet projects.
```

In this chapter we look into what a multi-module project looks like for Vaadin Portlets, and how it can be set up.

== Vaadin Portlet Multi-Module Project Structure

The project consists of _1+N_ modules, where _N_ is the number of portlets in the project - the _1_ stands for Vaadin frontend asset module.

> All frontend assets used by the Vaadin Portlets are packaged into a single war by the frontend asset module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All frontend assets used by the Vaadin Portlets are packaged into a single `WAR` by the frontend asset module.
```

The asset war can be deployed onto the same web server as the portlet wars, or onto some other file provider.

> Below is a sketch of a possible project structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a sketch of a possible project structure.
```

.Potential project structure
----
project-base
+-- frontend-bundle
+-- vaadin-portlet-1
+-- vaadin-portlet-2
:
+-- vaadin-portlet-n
----

For an example of a multi-module Vaadin Portlet project, take a look at the https://github.com/vaadin/addressbook-portlet[addressbook-portlet] and the associated tutorial <<demo-address-book.asciidoc#,Address Book Demonstration>>.
The tutorial covers the project structure and how the different portlet components interact.

Setting up the above project structure requires some configuration in pom.xml files of each module directly related to portlets.
After the configuration is done, and everything has been built and deployed once, further portlet deployments require deploying only the war file for the module being edited, if there are no frontend changes.
In the next section we show how to configure a multi-module Vaadin Portlet project.

== Configuring a Vaadin Portlet Multi-Module Project

Configuring the Vaadin Portlet multi-module project has two requirements:

> . Portlet modules build wars without frontend resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Portlet modules build `WARs` without frontend resources
```

+

> This is achieved by _not_ using `vaadin-maven-plugin` in the pom.xml.
> Normally, Vaadin 23+ projects would have `vaadin-maven-plugin` in the pom.xml to enable packaging frontend files into the war.
> Not using the plugin will leave the war without frontend resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is achieved by _not_ using `vaadin-maven-plugin` in the [filename]#pom.xml#.
Normally, Vaadin 23+ projects would have `vaadin-maven-plugin` in the [filename]#pom.xml# to enable packaging frontend files into the `WAR`.
Not using the plugin will leave the `WAR` without frontend resources.
```

> . Static asset module packages frontend resources from all portlet wars

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Static asset module packages frontend resources from all portlet `WARs`
```

+
This will require a bit more configuration.
The static-assets module needs to depend on all Vaadin portlet modules.

> This means, that each portlet module needs to build a war and a jar package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means, that each portlet module needs to build a `WAR` and a `JAR` package.
```

In addition, for the frontend resources to be available, the portlet modules need to be set up similarly to Vaadin add-on projects.
Finally, the portlet modules need to be configured to fetch frontend resources from the deployed static frontend resource provider.

=== Building Two Assets

> Building both war and jar can be achieved by configuring the maven-war-plugin as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building both a `WAR` and a `JAR` can be achieved by configuring the `maven-war-plugin` as follows:
```

.pom.xml in a portlet module
[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
    <artifactId>maven-war-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
        <attachClasses>true</attachClasses>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

Adding the `attachClasses` flag instructs Maven to build a jar file with `-classes` classifier.
We use this jar as a dependency in our static assets module:

> .Add module as dependency to static assets pom.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Add module as a dependency to static assets [filename]#pom.xml#
```

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>your.group</groupId>
    <artifactId>module-name</artifactId>
    <classifier>classes</classifier>
</dependency>
----

Replace the `groupId` and `artifactId` with the correct values.
The portlet module is now used as a dependency for the static asset module.

=== Structuring Module as a Vaadin Add-on

The significant part of the project structure, when considering add-ons, is the `frontend` resource folder.

> The folder is normally located on to root of the module for Vaadin 23+ projects.
> In order for the frontend resources to packaged into the jar file, place the files under the `frontend` folder to `/src/main/resources/META-INF/frontend/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The folder is normally located at the root of the module for Vaadin 23+ projects.
In order for the frontend resources to be packaged into the `JAR` file, place the files under the `frontend` folder to `/src/main/resources/META-INF/frontend/`.
```

=== Retrieving Frontend Resources from the Static Asset Artifact

> The Vaadin Portlet applications need to be instructed to retrieve the static frontend assets from the war build from the "static-vaadin-assets" module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vaadin Portlet applications need to be instructed to retrieve the static frontend assets from the `WAR` build from the `static-vaadin-assets` module.
```

This is done by adding the file `./src/main/resources/META-INF/VAADIN/config/flow-build-info.json`.

After creating the file, put the following contents into the JSON file:

.flow-build-info.json
[source,json]
----
{
  "externalStatsUrl": "/vaadin-portlet-static/VAADIN/config/stats.json"
}
----

> For portlets running in Liferay 7 JSON file shall contain "o" segment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For portlets running in Liferay 7, the JSON file should contain an "o" segment:
```

.flow-build-info.json
[source,json]
----
{
"externalStatsUrl": "/o/vaadin-portlet-static/VAADIN/config/stats.json"
}
----

> The `/vaadin-portlet-static/` is the assumed name of the war build from the static module.
> If you rename the war, change the JSON file to match.
> If you need to place the static asset war to some other web location, use the full URL to do so (keeping the `/VAADIN/...` portion intact).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `/vaadin-portlet-static/` is the assumed name of the `WAR` build from the static module.
If you rename the `WAR`, change the JSON file to match.
If you need to place the static asset `WAR` to some other web location, use the full URL to do so (keeping the `/VAADIN/...` portion intact).
```

[NOTE]
The relative URL is mapped to port `8080`, so the above partial URL would map as `http://127.0.0.1:8080/vaadin-portlet-static/VAADIN/config/stats.json`.
If your web server is mapped to a different port, provide the full URL instead of a relative URL.

== Deploying Multi-Module Portlet Project

> The deployment of a multi-module Vaadin Portlet project is very similar to that of the single module project: deploy all the portlet war files and static assets war file to your web server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deployment of a multi-module Vaadin Portlet project is very similar to that of the single module project: deploy all the portlet `WAR` files and static assets `WAR` file to your web server.
```

When editing a single portlet module, there are two different deployment patterns:

> - If you only edit the Java code of the portlet and do not add frontend resources, you can simply re-build the portlet war and only re-deploy that war file.
> - If you add frontend resources to your portlet module, you will need to re-build and re-deploy the static assets war as well as the portlet war itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you only edit the Java code of the portlet and do not add frontend resources, you can simply rebuild the portlet `WAR` and only redeploy that `WAR` file.
- If you add frontend resources to your portlet module, you will need to rebuild and redeploy the static assets `WAR`, as well as the portlet `WAR` itself.
```
